docs: docs for OpenTelemetry instrumentation (#5291)
jina-ai/jina: docs/fundamentals/executor/instrumenting-executor.md

(instrumenting-executor)=
# Instrumentation

> Instrumentation consists of [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io) Tracing and Metrics. Both features can be enabled independently and allows you to collect various request level and application level metrics for anaylizing the real time behavior of your Executor. 

Author: Tracing and Metrics are high level concepts used in the OpenTelemetry so they are used Nouns rather than verbs in this content.

> Instrumentation consists of [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io) Tracing and Metrics. Both features can be enabled independently and allows you to collect various request level and application level metrics for anaylizing the real time behavior of your Executor. 

Author: Didn't realize that my visual studio code doesn't have any spell check extension. I will go through the pages once more.

> This section documents the ability to create custom traces and metrics apart from the default ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section documents creating custom traces and metrics.
```

> ```{admonition} Full detail on Instrumentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{admonition} Full details on Instrumentation
```

:class: seealso

> This section describes how to use **custom** tracing spans. To use the Executor's default tracing, refer to {ref}`the Flow Instrumentation <instrumenting-flow>` section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes **custom** tracing spans. To use the Executor's default tracing, refer to {ref}`the Flow Instrumentation <instrumenting-flow>` section.
```

Cut excess wordage like "how to use" throughout the PR

```

```{hint}
The OpenTelemetry collector backend setup is described in the {ref}`OpenTelemetry Setup <opentelemetry>` section.
```

## Tracing

Every method that is decorated using the {class}`~jina.requests` decorator adds a 

> default tracing span for the defined operation. In addition the operation span context 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
default tracing span for the defined operation. In addition, the operation span context 
```

The `self.tracer` class attribute can be used to create a new child span using the `tracing_context` method argument as follows:

```python
from jina import Executor, requests

class MyExecutor(Executor):
    @requests
    def foo(self, docs, tracing_context, **kwargs):
        with self.tracer.start_as_current_span(
            'process_docs', context=tracing_context
        ) as process_span:
            process_span.set_attribute('sampling_rate', 0.01)
            docs = process(docs)
            with self.tracer.start_as_current_span('update_docs') as update_span:
                try:
                    update_span.set_attribute('len_updated_docs', len(docs))
                    docs = update(docs)
                except Exception as ex:
                    update_span.set_status(Status(StatusCode.ERROR))
                    update_span.record_exception(ex)
```

The above pieces of instrumentation generate 3 spans:
 1. Default span with name `foo` for the overall method.

>  2. `process_span` that measures the `process` and `update` sub operations along with a `sampling_rate` attribute that might be a constant or specific to the request/operation.

Reviewer: Is my interpretation ("either") correct here?

>  3. `update_span` that measures the `updated` operation along with any exception that might arise during the operation. The exception is recorded and marked on the `update_span` span. Since the exception is swallowed, the request succeeds with successful parent spans.

Author: - It should be "successful".
- Yes and No. The `Exception` class supports multiple exceptions which is caught by the `except` block. During the execution there can be at most one top level exception that is provided by the `ex` variable. Plural can be used for the first sentence and the singular needs to be used for the rest of the sentences because the the code captures the exception occurring at that point of time.

However within a span context, the `opentelemetry.trace.get_current_span()` method will return the span created inside the context.
```

````{admonition} respect OpenTelemetry Tracing semantic conventions
:class: caution
You should respect OpenTelemetry Tracing [semantic conventions](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/).
````

````{hint}
If tracing is not enabled by default or enabled per environment basis, its a good practice to check for the existence of the `self.tracer` before usage. If metrics is disabled then `self.tracer` will be None.
````

## Metrics

By default, every method decorated by the {class}`~jina.requests` decorator is monitored and creates a
[Histogram](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/metrics/data-model/#histogram) which tracks the execution time of 
the method.

> This section documents the ability to add custom monitoring to the {class}`~jina.Executor` with OpenTelemetry Metrics API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section documents adding custom monitoring to the {class}`~jina.Executor` with the OpenTelemetry Metrics API.
```

> Custom metrics are useful when you want to monitor each subpart of your Executors. Jina lets you leverage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom metrics are useful to monitor each sub-part of your Executor(s). Jina lets you leverage
```

the [Meter](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/metrics/api/#meter) to define useful metrics 
for each of your Executors. We provide a convenient wrapper as well, i.e {func}`~jina.monitor`, which lets easily monitor
your Executor's sub-methods. 

> When metrics is enabled, each Executor exposes its 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When metrics are enabled, each Executor exposes its 
```

Please ensure you use metrics as plural throughout the PR

own metrics via the [Metric Exporter](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/metrics/sdk/#metricexporter).

### Define custom metrics

> Sometimes monitoring the `encoding` method is not enough - you need to break it up into multiple parts that you want to monitor one by one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes monitoring the `encoding` method is not enough - you need to break it up into multiple parts to monitor one by one.
```

(instrumenting-executor)=
# Instrumentation

> Instrumentation consists of [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io) Tracing and Metrics. Each feature can be enabled independently, and they allow you to collect request-level and application level metrics for analyzing an Executor's real-time behavior. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instrumentation consists of [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io) Tracing and Metrics. Each feature can be enabled independently, and they allow you to collect request-level and application-level metrics for analyzing an Executor's real-time behavior. 
```

> This section documents creating custom traces and metrics.

Reviewer: I'm not sure we need lines like these. We literally discussed traces and metrics in the last para, so users are primed already

```{admonition} Full details on Instrumentation
:class: seealso

> This section describes **custom** tracing spans. To use the Executor's default tracing, refer to {ref}`the Flow Instrumentation <instrumenting-flow>` section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes **custom** tracing spans. To use the Executor's default tracing, refer to {ref}`Flow Instrumentation <instrumenting-flow>`.
```

```

```{hint}

> The OpenTelemetry collector backend setup is described in the {ref}`OpenTelemetry Setup <opentelemetry>` section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read more on setting up an OpenTelemetry collector backend in the {ref}`OpenTelemetry Setup <opentelemetry>` section.
```

```

> ```{hint}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```{caution}
```

It would be nice if you could spread these boxes around a bit, it is a bit jarring to have three boxes next to each other.

> Prometheus only based metrics collection will be deprecated soon. Refer to {ref}`Monitoring Executor <monitoring-executor>` section for the deprecated setup.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can specify a jina version where this will happen?

> Prometheus only based metrics collection will be deprecated soon. Refer to {ref}`Monitoring Executor <monitoring-executor>` section for the deprecated setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prometheus-only based metrics collection will soon be deprecated. Refer to {ref}`Monitoring Executor <monitoring-executor>` for this deprecated setup.
```

```

## Tracing

Any method that uses the {class}`~jina.requests` decorator adds a 
default tracing span for the defined operation. In addition, the operation span context 
is propagated to the method for creating further user-defined child spans within the 
method.

You can create custom spans to observe the operation's individual steps or record details and attributes with finer granularity. When tracing is enabled, Jina provides the OpenTelemetry Tracer implementation as an Executor class attribute that you can use to create new child spans. The `tracing_context` method argument contains the parent span context using which a new span can be created to trace the desired operation in the method.

> If tracing is enabled, each Executor exports its traces to the configured exporter host via the [Span Exporter](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/trace/sdk/#span-exporter). The backend combines these traces for visualization and alerting purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If tracing is enabled, each Executor exports its traces to the configured exporter host via the [Span Exporter](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/trace/sdk/#span-exporter). The backend combines these traces for visualization and alerting.
```

You can use the `self.tracer` class attribute to create a new child span using the `tracing_context` method argument:

```python
from jina import Executor, requests

class MyExecutor(Executor):
    @requests
    def foo(self, docs, tracing_context, **kwargs):
        with self.tracer.start_as_current_span(
            'process_docs', context=tracing_context
        ) as process_span:
            process_span.set_attribute('sampling_rate', 0.01)
            docs = process(docs)
            with self.tracer.start_as_current_span('update_docs') as update_span:
                try:
                    update_span.set_attribute('len_updated_docs', len(docs))
                    docs = update(docs)
                except Exception as ex:
                    update_span.set_status(Status(StatusCode.ERROR))
                    update_span.record_exception(ex)
```

The above pieces of instrumentation generate three spans:
 1. Default span with name `foo` for the overall method.
 2. `process_span` that measures the `process` and `update` sub-operations along with a `sampling_rate` attribute that is either a constant or specific to the request/operation.

>  3. `update_span` that measures the `updated` operation along with any exceptions that might arise during the operation. The exception is recorded and marked on the `update_span` span. Since the exception is swallowed, the request succeeds with successful parent spans.

Author: It should be successful because the parent span gets created before the child span and succeeds after the child span has completed.

```{admonition} 
The Python OpenTelemetry API provides a global tracer via the `opentelemetry.trace.tracer()` method which is not set or used directly in Jina. The class attribute `self.tracer` is used for the default `@requests` method tracing and must also be used as much as possible within the method for creating child spans.

However within a span context, the `opentelemetry.trace.get_current_span()` method returns the span created inside the context.
```

````{admonition} Respect OpenTelemetry Tracing semantic conventions
:class: caution
You should respect OpenTelemetry Tracing [semantic conventions](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/).
````

````{hint}

> If tracing is not enabled by default or enabled per environment basis, you should check `self.tracer` exists before usage. If metrics are disabled then `self.tracer` will be `None`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If tracing is not enabled by default or enabled in your environment, check `self.tracer` exists before usage. If metrics are disabled then `self.tracer` will be `None`.
```

````

## Metrics

```{hint}

> Prometheus only based metrics collection will be deprecated soon. Refer to {ref}`Monitoring Executor <monitoring-executor>` section for the deprecated setup.

Reviewer: See prior comment on this line

```

Any method that uses the {class}`~jina.requests` decorator is monitored and creates a
[histogram](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/metrics/data-model/#histogram) which tracks the method's execution time.

This section documents adding custom monitoring to the {class}`~jina.Executor` with the OpenTelemetry Metrics API.

Custom metrics are useful to monitor each sub-part of your Executor(s). Jina lets you leverage
the [Meter](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/metrics/api/#meter) to define useful metrics 

> for each of your Executors. We provide a convenient wrapper as well, i.e {func}`~jina.monitor`, which lets you monitor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for each of your Executors. We also provide a convenient wrapper, ({func}`~jina.monitor`), which lets you monitor
```

your Executor's sub-methods. 

When metrics are enabled, each Executor exposes its 
own metrics via the [Metric Exporter](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/metrics/sdk/#metricexporter).

### Define custom metrics

Sometimes monitoring the `encoding` method is not enough - you need to break it up into multiple parts to monitor one by one.

> This is useful if your encoding phase is composed of two tasks: image processing and
> image embedding. By using custom metrics on these two tasks you can identify potential bottlenecks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is useful if your encoding phase is composed of two tasks, like image processing and
image embedding. By using custom metrics on these two tasks you can identify potential bottlenecks.
```

:class: caution
You should respect OpenTelemetry Metrics [semantic conventions](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/metrics/semantic_conventions/).
````

#### Use OpenTelemetry Meter

Under the hood, Python [OpenTelemetry Metrics API](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/signals/metrics/) handles the Executor's metrics feature. The {func}`~jina.monitor` decorator is convenient for monitoring an Executor's sub-methods, but if you need more flexibility, use the `self.meter` Executor class attribute to create supported instruments:

```python
from jina import requests, Executor, DocumentArray

from prometheus_client import Counter

class MyExecutor(Executor):
    def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs):
        super().__init__(*args, **kwargs)
        self.counter = self.meter.create_counter('my_count', 'my count')

    @requests
    def encode(self, docs: DocumentArray, **kwargs):
        self.counter.inc(len(docs))
```

This creates a [Counter](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/metrics/api/#counter) that you can use to incrementally track the number of Documents received in each request. 

````{hint}

> If metrics are not enabled by default or enabled on a per environment basis, you should check `self.meter` and `self.counter` exist before usage. If metrics are disabled then `self.meter` will be `None`.

Reviewer: See prior comment on similar line

````

#### Example

> Let's use an example to show custom metrics:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This line is redundant. Kill it

The OpenTelemetry collector backend setup is described in the {ref}`OpenTelemetry Setup <opentelemetry>` section.
```

> ```{hint}

Reviewer 3: will be deprecated soon

Author: The other question is to keep or remove the `Monitoring` pages from the index? I have removed them in the current commit.

Reviewer 2: I would keep it like it currently is (removed from the index). Otherwise it looks duplicate and I can see confusion arising. The people that need it should still be able to find it.
